The Project Gutenberg EBook of Koottuja suomalaisia lauluja, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Koottuja suomalaisia lauluja

Author: Various

Release Date: November 22, 2019 [EBook #60763]

Language: Finnish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KOOTTUJA SUOMALAISIA LAULUJA ***




Produced by Jari Koivisto








KOOTTUJA SUOMALAISIA LAULUJA

Kokoilija

Frans Isaac Fortell


Ensimmäinen Osa




Oulussa, 1828.
Prändatty C. E. Barckin Kirjan-Präntisä.






    Luulen minä luonnossani
    Wjelä Wanhan Wäjnämöisen
    Lepytttäwän Lapsiansa,
    Kautta Kanteleen Kumauksen,
    Jota Juteeni jumautti
    Saksa soittili somaasti.



SISÄLLYS:

    Lukiain Tjeoksi.
 1. Laulu Suurelle Ruhtinalle.
 2. Muisto-Weisu Carle XII:toista.
 3. Isän neuwo ajnoalle Pojallensa.
 4. Ennen ja Nyt.
 5. Muisto-Laulu Noakista.
 6. Talon-Pojan Laulu.
 7. Rinaldini.
 8. Rakkauen Huokaus.
 9. Käkin Polska.
    Muistutus.




Lukiain Tjeoksi.


Hamasta siittä hetkestä saakka, kuin minä itse rupeisin opettelemaan,
on se ollut syämmellinen haluni: Äjtin kjelellä, Suomen yhteiselle
kansalle, jotain huwittawaista walistuksen lisää jakaa, se on
tosi minä en oo, wiisauen lähteestä, niin paljoa tajon wettä
ammentanut, hankkiakseni sen kaltaista oppia, että omasta kunnostani,
mitään sanottawaa olisin paperille pannut, mutta jokainen hawaittee
kuitenkin tarkoitukseni wilpittömäksi, tutkistellesansa, kuinka palawa
rakkaus minulla on ollut, ja on wjelä eteenkin päin olewa, meijän
Suomenkjeltämme kohtaan.

Useammat wuojet olen minä kokoillut Suomalaisia Lauluja, ja nyt
mielisuosiokseni saan 1:sen osan präntiin. Näitä Lauluja annetaan
wähintäänkin 4:jä Osa, Ja minä toiwon että se wiimeinenki osa tulee
ulos ennen tulewan kesäkuun loppua. Jokainen tjetää kyllä, kuinka
paljon Wanhoja Runoja on hukkauntunnut, juuri siittä syystä ettei net
aikanaan oo tullut präntätyksi, samankaltainen perikato olis näille
Lauile tapahtunut, jos kauemmin saiwat olla präntämätä.

Näistä Lauluista owat net Sihteeri Judeenin tekemjä, joissa on alla,
merkitty: J.J. Ja Suomussalmen Kappalaisen Pastori Saxan tekemäin alla
on: C.S. Jotka owat Ruottista Suomennetut, Lauletaan samalla nuotilla
kuin Ruotteksikin: mutta joisa ej merki puustaweta ole alla niitten
tekjät owat tuntemattomat.

Ehkä minä olen paljon kuluttanut ja waiwaa nähnyt, kirjottanut sinne
ja tänne kokoillessani näitä Lauluja, ja jokainen taitaa hawaita, että
minä olen kuitenkin tarkoittanut Suomenkjelen kunnjaa, ja Lauluin
rakastaiille huwitusta, jos en muuta tarkoituksellani olis aikaan
saanut. Ja jos näissä Lauluissa löytyis, senkaltaisia jotka ej ole
kaikille mjeliksi, ja joita wjelä ajan päälle saatetaan parantaa, koska
net tulewat taitawainki silmäittäwäksi, niin ej mahda kukaan syyttää
Lauluin tekijöitä, jos niistä joku puutten alaiselta näyttäis. Minun
aikomukseni oli ensiksi, Präntäyttää, näitä Latinaisilla Puustaweilla,
joka olis ollut Suomen Kjelelle suureksi kunniaksi: Mutta ettej kaikki
yhteisestä kansasta ole wjelä harjauntuneet lukemaan kirjoja, jotka
präntätään Latinaisilla Puustaweilla niin hawaittin minä soweliammaksi
ulosantaa, nämät tawallisilla kirjan sauwoilla. Suomen kansa on ajna
ollut nopia oppimaan ja halulinen taitoon, niin muotoin toiwon minä
jonku ajan perästä taitawani ulos antaa 2:sen Ylöspanon, latina
puustaweisia näistä Lauluista, jos ystäwällisistä maan mjehistä, joku
wjeläkin tahtois minulle suosionsa osottaa lähettäin, Lauluja ynnä
tekjän merkillä nimitetty alla, otan minä net kiitollisuuella wastaan:
Wiimmeiseksi saan minä ystäwällisesti mainita, että 1:nen Osa maksaa
18 killingjä kaikille ostaille eli 50 kop. Ja net jälkimäiset osat 12
kill. niille jotka kaikki osat ottawat: mutta, net jotka ej jokaista
Osaa osta maksawat niistä Osista kuin het ottamat 18 kill. eli 50
kopeikkaa. Oulun Kaupunkista Joulukuun 8:tenä päiwänä 1827.

                                          Frans Isaac Fortell,
                                            Lauluin Kokoilja.




No 1.

Laulu Suurelle Ruhtinalle.


    v. 1.

    Eläköön armias
    Rakkahin Ruhtinas,
    Rauhallinen,
    Jossa on onnemme,
    Jossa on ilomme
    Turwam ja toiwomme
    Täyellinen.

    V. 2.

    Osottain armonsa
    Wahwistain waltansa
    Wartjamme
    Walistus (on) wirinuyt
    Elatus enännyt
    Murhet myös wähennyt
    Majojsamme

    v. 3.

    Suojeltu Soassa
    Riemuitkoon rauhassa
    Suomalainen,
    Ollen taas uuella
    Uskollisuuella
    Urhollisuuella
    Alammainen.

    v. 4.

    O! Luoja laupias
    Wahwista wojmallas
    Wartiamme,
    Aamuja enennä
    Päjwjä pjennä
    Murhet myös wähennä
    Ruhtinamme.

                J.J.




N:o 2.

Muisto-Wejsu Carle XII:toista, awattajssa Hänen Lepo majaansa Upsalan
wanhasa Tuomio Kirkosa, Sata wuotta jälken hänen kuolemaansa, laulettu
Tutenteilta, 1818. (Ruotsista Suomennettu).


    v. 1.

    Hiljan awauwat hauwan owet,
    Käykäämme kempejn lepohon:
    Hejll:e wuotten wanhain hywät henget
    Sulojsen majan suokohon!
    Pohjanki Leijo lepää sjellä
    Untansa Satawuotista:
    Wajin tuuli tuntureilla wjellä
    Wirttänsä wejsaa tuonista.

    V. 2.

    Hän on kumma Sinusta kuin kijtät
    Nykyjsen ajan arwoa,
    Kuin rauhan touwot turhin käytät
    Rakastain Tansin rujhua;
    Wajn Pojka Pohjan, wuorill sjennyt,
    Kujnka se turhin tytyypi?
    Hän taasen luonnon tejlle rjennyt
    Isänsä iloon mjeltyypi.

    v. 3.

    Wajn Sota Sopaa ylentäissä
    Wojma on hällä wajawa;
    Se käypi raskaaksi, kuin kyrssä,
    Jonk' yli kulkee Otawa:
    Ilossa mjehuus oli mennyt,
    Tarmoki Isäin tuhlattu;
    Ja Göthan Leijo lewon löynnyt,
    Mies walitujhin werrattu.

    v. 4.

    Ah! itke ystäwäni -- ollut
    On ajka --  mujnon ihana:
    Sen meno, mainioksi tullut,
    On monell' outo tarina;
    Wjelä wähätki työt ja tawat
    Kauniiksi kyllä kerskataan,
    Waan annas wuojet toistawat:
    Niin Carlen wertaa kaiwataan.

    v. 5.

    K'en wuosisatain kuluttuwa
    Saa wjelä kansan kyyneleet,
    Mikä ääni tuonen ouwostuwa,
    Nyt hejkkoja herättelet?
    Net owat kuolleet kuninkaamme.
    Kuin rjensit kohen taiwaasta;
    Näjn kotkan pojat nähä saamme
    Menewän Isäins majasta.

    v. 6.

    O Carle! siwulles sowitaan
    Mä työstin kauniin mjehuuwen,
    Kujn käwi ulos saksaan Sotaan
    Wojttamaan uskon wapauwen;
    Myös heitä moni pahan suopa
    Kjelellä kärmeen häwäsee;
    Wain ken' on tähet alastuopa?
    Ken' linnun raan ratkasee?

    v. 7.

    Nyt Tekin, jalot Sota kempit
    Iloiten multa muistellaan,
    Ej tomuanne kätke Templit
    Wajin kunniaanne kattellaan;
    Sen wanhat näyttä Sota rauwat
    Ej sitten keltään käytetyt.
    Hajauneet kuin ne pyhät hauwat
    Joiss' owat luunna kätketyt.

    v. 8.

    Ken' woj sen pimeyywen pojstaa,
    Kujn ajat pejttää kohtaamat?
    Wjeläkö niitten walta lojstaa
    Kuin kempeillen nyt uhrawat?
    Pojka! jos pyhyys rinnas palaa,
    Niin kunnias myös kukoistaa:
    Maast' ej se tule mutta salaa
    Se tulee sullen tajwaistaa.

    v. 9.

    Ett usko arwon antaa töjllen
    Sen tunsit suuri Carleni!
    Mjekkasi nostit Sä rukojllen
    Ja Tajwas jalo aukeni;
    Jost astuit alas wallan wojmat
    Ja wäkes Sotaan warustit,
    Jaottain kaikki joukot tujmat,
    Kuin Woijeltua wastustit.

                                C.S.




No 3.

Isän neuwo ajnoalle Pojallensa,
Nuoruen wjettämisestä ja Naimisesta.

Weisataan niin kuin: Luonnon suuren lappsukaiset.


    v. I.

    Ajnoseni elettyäs wuotta wijsi tojsta,
    Alka Rakkaus rinnasasi lejmuta ja lojstaa.
    Ah, Ah ihana tämä tunto ompi
    Wajn se waltana surun sulle tuopi.

    v. 2.

    Kas keolla ohaketta, kuinka se kukoisti,
    Kukkaisilta koristettu, Purpuralta paisti.
    Ah, Ah tuulella myrsky kukat karsi
    Ja nyt jälellä wäkäinen on warsi.

    v. 3.

    Näin on ruusu Rakkauen kaunis kukoistawa,
    Wain se onki Toiwon oras aroin sueltawa.
    Ah, Ah kuiwennut, kuin on tämä kukka,
    Rjemu rauwennut, elo onnen, hukka.

    v. 4.

    Niinkuin Laiwa lainehtiwa, merell myrstyisillä,
    Nijn on nuorukainen täällä tjellä tuonisellä.
    Ah, Ah, taijolla, Aamun koitto käytä,
    Nijn ej ehtolla Suru sua jäytä.

    v. 5.

    Maltas siemen sinapin on pjenin alusansa,
    Wajn se puista puhkewina on ihanuesansa.
    Ah, Ah oksisa lintu parwi pauhaa
    Ja sen suoissa rajun säällä rauha.

    v. 6.

    Näin on helma hurskauen, wähin wesasansa,
    Wajn se Taiwaat sawuttapi, täynnä toukonansa.
    Ah, Ah Engelit latwois laulelewat,
    Toiwon mantelit lehis' loistelewat.

    v. 7.

    Pyyäs tämä Sjelun siemen pyhin säilytellä,
    Tätä töjllä kaunojsilla ajna kaswatella.
    Ah, Ah Pojkani, ole orwon Isä,
    Se on omasi sulos suurin lisä.

    v. 8.

    Kuin sä mjehistyisäs mjelit mennä kosimahan,
    Älä waiha Rakkauttas Ristahan ja Rahaan.
    Ah, Ah, kylmä on kulta kumpanina
    Hopee hinnaton yljän ystäwänä.

    V. 9.

    Älä anna rikkauen, mjeltäs maanitella
    Jos se olis yhistetty Syämmen sapella.
    Ah, Ah warjona rikkauskin katoo,
    Sitten seurana murhen musta mato.

    V. 10.

    Wain jos näet nueren Nejon aran ihanaisen,
    Siweyellä siwistetyn töjsä taitawajsen,
    Ah, Ah suotuisin sulle täsä Tyttö
    Sulha suloisin Sywämmesi syttö.

    v. 11.

    Häntä walittua helmailesas waimonasi
    Täällä sulla Edin ilo täällä Taiwahasi.
    Ah, Ah Rakkaus awuil krunun antaa,
    Rakkaun rikkaus kalliit hedelmät kantaa.

    v. 12.

    Niin kuin Tammet Libanonin ilmoit' ylemmät,
    Samoin Lapset Lasten Lapset teitä sylejlewät.
    Ah, Ah, eläisa onni osan anne,
    Tuoneen tullessa Taiwas tawaranne.




X.o 4.

Ennen ja Nyt.

Lauletaan kuin: Bort plog och spade ur min hand.


    v. 1.

    Ennen olit Nejot arat
    Ihanat ujoiset,
    Nyt owat Nejot naisparat,
    Rohkeat, rajwoiset.

    v. 2.

    Ennen ujous suojana
    Nejtosen nisillä,
    Nyt poisa pejtto ihana
    Häwyksi hywille.

    v. 3.

    Ennen Nejtojnen Nejtsyen
    Kanteli kruununa,
    Nyt surmattua siweywen
    Aina on Ehtona.

    v. 4.

    Ennen Pijkajnen petetty
    Kuin Halmet hallainen,
    Nyt se askeleen yletty
    On kaikkein kultainen.

    v. 5.

    Ennen se töiten toimessa
    Nopeus Neitosen,
    Nyt tutaan Tansin tahissa
    Ripeys Ruusuisen.

    v. 6.

    Ennen Pijkajset Pyhinä
    Luit kirjaa kultaista,
    Nyt käywään näinä päiwinä
    Pitohin Pioista.

    v. 7.

    Ennen Tytöllä ylkäjnen
    Yksi ja ihanainen,
    Nyt sillä Sulhaa kymenen
    Ej kukaan omajnen.

    v. 8.

    Siweywen kauwat sulojset
    Kuin het näin käyttäwät,
    Onkos nyt ihmet Nejtoiset?
    Jos pojat pettäwät.




N:o 5.

Muisto-Laulu Noakista.

Ystäwän luona laulettawa. (Ruottista suomennettu).


    v. 1.

    Ukko Noall, Ukko Noall
                 Oli Mjehen mjel.
    Kujn hän läksi Arkist
    Istuitti hän tärkist
    Wiina Puita, Wiina puita
                 jotka kaswa wjel.

    v. 2.

    Noak sousi, Noak sousi
                 Ulos Arkistans
    Teki wijna-lejlin
    Näköjäns kuin kejlin
    Juodaksensa, Juodaksensa
                 Maalle päästyänsä.

    v. 3.

    Noak arwas, Noak arwas
                 Että Ihminen
    Monast janostuupi
    Niin että hän juopi.
    Paljast wijna, paljast wijna
                 Pjenen tuoppisen.

    v. 4.

    Ukko Noak, Ukko Noak
                 Asjansa tjes.
    Hän joj Pito-paikas
    Ejkä wjettän ajkaans
    Turhil puhejl, turhil puhejl
                 Niin kuin sinä mjes.

    v. 5.

    Eukko Noan, Eukko Noan
                 Kiitettäwä työ
    Hän soi Ukkons juowan
    Ajoj pojat tuomaan
    Tojsta wijna, tojsta wijna
                 Monast läpi yön.

    v. 6.

    Ej hän sanon', Ej hän sanon'
                 Ukko pane pois
    Jo tuo wijna lejlis;
    Ej: waan näytti pejlis
    Kujnka kaunist, kuinka kaunist
                 Ukon kaswat loist!

    v. 7.

    Noak oli, Noak oli,
                 Peruukiton mjes
    Pujoparta Ukko
    Punajnen kuin kukko.
    Pohjaan ajna, Pohjan ajna
                 Joj hän-kukatjes.

    v. 8.

    Sillon Syntyi, Sillojn syntyi
                 Elää majlmas
    Silloin oli ottaa,
    Wähintäänkin Olta
    Ejkä janost, Ejkä janost
                 Tjetty koko maas.

    v. 9.

    Mujston juonti, muiston juonti
                 Ej wjel ollu majl
    Waan tuollainen malja
    Jossa nyt on kaljaa
    Juotiin pohjan, juotiin pohjan
                 Aiwan tällälail.




N:o 6.

Talon-Pojan Laulu.

Wejsataan kuin: Gref Adam.


    v. 1.

    En kerskaa ma Sukuni Suuruesta,
    Waan wejsajlen wapaasti mjehuesta.
    Työstäni tuleepi hyöjytys huwitus.
    Waltakunnallekkin wojman on wahwistus
    Wirkan on hywä, ja sätyn on suur
    :,: Talon-pojaksi mä mainitaan juur. :,:

    v. 2.

    Me arwomme wijsailta ansaitsemme
    Ain ahkeruella ja järjellämme
    Pojkamme puhtailla pestyillä poskilla
    Harmaalla jakulla, harjatuil' hjuksilla
    Waatiwat Tyttäret tojwohon päin
    :,: Lisääten rjemua Rinnojssa näjn :,:

    v: 3.

    Kuin korkiat kaipaawat kokousta
    Ja etsiwät hullusti huwitusta
    Sillojn me töitämme toimella täytämme
    Aljetun päiwämme rjemulla päätämme
    Wiljellen maatamme illolla waan
    :,: Aurassa arwo on Isäjmme maan. :,:

    v. 4.

    O Tyhmät! Kuin luulewat kunniansa
    Ajna waluwan armosta wanhempainsa
    Sukunsa ijänkin suurena pitäwät
    Isänsä kunnjan isojlle käyttäwät.
    Kun sukuni Adamist alkunsa sai
    :,: Minä nauran siis muille, ja olen ain wai. :,:

                                          J.J.




N:o 7.

Rinaldini.

(Ruottista Suomennettu).


    v. 1.

    Wihannilla wainjoilla
    Synkist wuoren Salojsta :,:
    Mettisä ja Erämajlla :,:
    Hajen Sulhajn sulojsta. :,:

    v. 2.

    Rinaldini Syämmeni
    Sua suree päjwät yöt :,:
    Mustaksi mureheni :,:
    Kuwaa luonnon kauniit työt. :,:

    v. 3.

    Ah näjn Ruusa rukka itken'
    Rauhatoinna rjentäen :,:
    Häntä ootan joka hetken :,:
    Tjeltä Tuonen tujmjen. :,:

    v. 4.

    Ah kuin koitteessa kuun walon,
    Erä tjetä tulee hän :,:
    Ruusa luule kilwen kijllon :,:
    Läpi pensaan lojstawan. :,:

    v. 5.

    Ah hän tulee iloll ehtii,
    Ruusa häntä helmaileen :,:
    Sammua Sä öjsen tähti :,:
    Rakkaus awaa askeleen. :,:

    v. 6.

    O! mis on hän tähet ilmoin
    Maltittee kos matkansa?
    Ah tytywen jo toisiin nejtojn :,:
    Rakastaa kos Ruusaansa. :,:

    v. 7.

    Hiljaa Hiljaa mehtä nuortuu
    Haj Hän huutaa iloni :,:
    Sulha uskollinen suotu :,:
    Äänen kuulen kaunoni. :,:

    v. 8.

    Tee nyt halti (pysäy) jo halajlen
    Sua kauwan surtua :,:
    Rinaldo! sua sylejlen :,:
    Multa taas tawattua. :,:

                          C.S.




N:o 8.

Rakkauen Huokaus.


    v. 1.

    Silmäisäs salauwat
    Murheni murtuwat
    Nauraisas kuwauwat
    :,: Tajwaat tojwottawat. :,:

    v. 2.

    Silmäni sulollansa
    Kauneuttas kattelee
    Waan waroin nähtyänsä
    :,: Pijlejllä pyytelee. :,:

    v. 3.

    Usejn mulle unessa
    Kuwailee kaswosi
    Waan uni on ohessa
    :,: Ja mennyt muotosi. :,:

           *   *   *

    Ensin Wenejästä Ruottiksi käätty
      Prowasti Ehrströmiltä
    Ja sitte Ruottista Suomennettu.

                            C.S.




N:o 9.

Näkin Polska.


    v. 1.

    Wille tanssais Ringis wellieksyywen
    Itäisen weden wjerellä
    Ehton henki Laski lewon sijwen
    Ylitten luonnon lemmellä:
    Kastet loisteli
    Reunilla Ruususten
    Rastaat lauleli
    Latwoissa lehmusten.
    Öiset lensitt lehwillä
    Ja toiwon tähet wälkyit wesillä.

    v. 2.

    Enkeli jo unell suloisella
    Tuuwitti pojan pjenoisen:
    Kuin se kuuli --  hymyll hiljaisella,
    Kanteleen äänen Kaunosen --
    Näkki istujen
    Lumpehen lehellä.
    Soitti iloiten
    Kahilain Keskellä --
    Jos onnee aiwot nautita,
    Nij'n weisun kallis arwo käsitä.

    v. 3.

    Wähä Wille rannallen se riensi
    Sanoin: Suos oppi Soittosi?
    Tules kulta! Käytäs tänne Käsi
    Ilolla täytän toiwosi --
    Näkki tajua
    Wain weisut wesissä
    Ja nijhen neuwua
    Saa meren salissa:
    Jos onnee aiwot nautita,
    Nijn weisun Kallis arwo käsitä.

    v. 4.

    Jossäs tunnet toiwon määrättömän.
    Syttyneenä syämmessä,
    Otas harppu, ilon äärettömän
    Hawaita saat sen äänessä --
    Taiwan tarholla
    Kuin tähet Koittawat --
    Laula Soitolla
    Ja wuoret wastaawat:
    Jos onnee aiwot nautita,
    Nijn weisun Kallis arwo käsitä.

    v. 5.

    Wille Koski kjeltä kanteleessa
    Ja äänen säteen muotossa
    Wäristen meni keon kukkaisissa
    Ja meren mustan Kallwossa --
    Usein illalla
    Kuin kannel äänteli
    Hän nyt rannalla
    Näkin kans lauleli;
    Jos onnee aiwot nautita,
    Nijn weisun Kallis arwo käsitä.

    v. 6.

    Toiwon Koitteen Kirkaan harpun päällä
    Kuu yöllä kaunis walaisi,
    Wäinön haamu weellä hämäräällä
    Surewan Jouhteen kuwaisi;
    Willen powessa
    Jossa Pyhyys paloi
    Harpun lywessä (lyödessä)
    Ilo ja suru soi:
    Jos onnee aiwot nautita,
    Nijn weisun Kallis arwo käsitä.

    v. 7.

    Willen täyty mennä koti maalta
    Ej Näkki enään weisaile;
    Wain jos sydän huokaa huolten alta
    Se kuin unessa kuwaile:
    Sanoo siwiä
    Soittojen keskellä
    Muistas Näkkiä
    Näin lauloi lehellä:
    Jos onnee aiwot nautita,
    Nijn weisun Kallis arwo käsitä.

    v. 8.

    Willen majassa jo majailewat
    Lapset lystit ja iloiset
    Kanteletta Isäns kuuntelewat
    Kuin laulut soittaa suloset --
    Weisun Jumala,
    Siell näyttää asuwan,
    Pyhäll uskolla
    Lapsellen lausuwan:
    Jos onnee aiwot nautita,
    Nijn weisun Kallis arwo käsitä.

                            C.S.




N:o 10.

Poikaiset.

Ruottista Suomennettu.


    v. 1.

    Minä muistan ajan muinan
    Ja sen kuin ejläisen,
    Kuin rauha täytti rinnan
    Ja ilo askelen;
    Ej Synti Saanut sia
    Ejk murhe minusa,
    Waan läksy luettua
    Menoni mjelusa.

    v. 2

    Suusani oli ilo
    Ruumisa raittius.
    Sjelusa asui sulo
    Ja hywän halaus;
    Kaikki remusat pojat
    Koht olit weljeni,
    Sisaren nuoret nejot
    Ja ämmät äitini.

    v. 3.

    Minä muistan kedot myöskin
    Joit muinon miteltijn;
    Joisa minä leikit laskin
    Ja mjeheks kijteltijn;
    Ne monet pila-menot
    Kaunijlla kesillä,
    Hatuisa pjenet perhot
    Ja punan poskilta.

    v. 4.

    Juonisa kawaloisa
    Ej mennyt mjeleni,
    Kaikisa kumpaneisa
    Näin jalot weljeni;
    Ej pitkä tora tjetty
    Ej sydän salattu,
    Kuin korwa puusti lyöty
    Nijn wiha waikettu.

    v. 5.

    En säätyin eroitusta
    Nähnyt näin' päiwinä,
    Herroja halwemmista
    Ej eroitettuna;
    Keskellä ilo-leikin
    Se, meistä poijsta
    Kuin kauwimmaks' löi kopin
    Mainioin mjehistä.

    v. 6.

    Totuudell tuomittihin
    Wiat ja ansiot,
    Oikeudell arwattihin
    Nopainkin nakannot;
    Sen köyhän kerjäläisen
    Woitollen rjemuittijn
    Jos kumo kuningaisen
    Kuin Herrald siwuttijn.

    v. 7.

    Kyll walitukset
    Kuultijn Sydämmen surusta,
    Jos lyötijn eli luultijn
    Ketään Kumpaneista,
    Ihana oli ilon
    Takasin tulleelle
    Ainoan palon jaon
    Sill surulliselle.

    v. 8.

    Waan nuoruteni Weljet
    Ah aika muuttuwa;
    En teitä enään tunnet
    Te että minua;
    Jo mjehiks joutunehet
    On pojat muinaiset
    Ruasta rijtaunehet
    Wiroista wihaiset.

    v. 9.

    Kymmentä neljä wuotta
    Jo waiwois eläneet
    Wastasta wuori tjetä;
    Onnians etsineet,
    Mit autta arwon merkki
    Jong perään pyöritään
    Kuin sydän Kylmä tykki
    Ja kaswot kellataan.

                      C.S.
           Pappi-Papin-poika Pohjolasta.




Muistutus.


Nyt wihdoin wiimenkin, saat sinä halullinen Lauluin Rakastaja 1:en Osan
näistä Kootuista Suomalaisista Lauluista, Joidenka olis puolta wuotta
enemmin pitänyt olla walmisna; Syy minkätähden, nämät Laulut owat näin
kauan, ja ajna tähän asti wiipyneet, on kahtalainen: talwella ej ollut
Oulun Kirjan Pränttääjällä H:ra Barkilla, muitten kiiretten töitten
wuoksi ajkaa saaha walmiiksi näitä: Ja minä myöskin Konsistoriumin
käskyn jälkeen tulin taammaksi muutetuksi ja niin jäi se siltään.

Muutamia paino erhetyksiä on myöskin, huomahtemata ilmauntunut: mutta
net taitaa lukia itse helposti ojentaa; koska hän tarkkauella silmää
sen sanan jossa erhetys näyttää olewan.

Jos tämä 1:en Osa halulla otetaan rakastetuilta maan mjehiltä ja
yhteiseltä kansalta wastaan, tulee piaan net muutkin luwatut osat
präntätyksi; Ejkä kenenkään tarwitse epäillä, ettei tämä tule toimeen:
ajnostansa, nämät ostetaan, ja ejwätkä; niinkuin peljättäwä on jää
minun wahinkokseni, omaan huostaani. Oulusta Heinäkuun 10:nä päiwänä
1828. Isaac Fortell.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Koottuja suomalaisia lauluja, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KOOTTUJA SUOMALAISIA LAULUJA ***

***** This file should be named 60763-8.txt or 60763-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/7/6/60763/

Produced by Jari Koivisto

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

